---
layout: page
permalink: /teaching/ctd2526
title: Challenges to Democracy (Winter term 25/26)
description: 
nav: false
---

<html lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title>Fancy Table</title>
    <style>
        .fancy-table {
            width: 100%;
            border-collapse: collapse;
            text-align: left;
            vertical-align: top;
        }
        .fancy-table th, .fancy-table td {
            padding: 12px;
            border: 1px solid #ddd;
            text-align: left;
            vertical-align: top;
        }
        .fancy-table th {
            background-color: #f4f4f4;
            font-weight: bold;
        }
        .fancy-table tr:nth-child(even) {
            background-color: #f9f9f9;
        }
        .fancy-table tr:hover {
            background-color: #f1f1f1;
        }

        .plain-table {
            width: 100%;
            text-align: left;
            vertical-align: top;
        }
        .plain-table th, .plain-table td {
            padding: 12px;
        }
    </style>
</head>
<body>
    <h3>Content</h3><br>
    <p>The seminar seeks to analyse the current challenges democratic regimes face. It is structured along three blocks. In the first block, we will learn about the essential features of a democracy and discover what shapes the quality of democracy. In a second block, we will engage with different empirical analyses of the current state of democratization and democratic systems. We will zero in on how institutions are sidelined; how actors, such as far-right parties, challenge democracies; and how democracy is threatened by crises. In the third block, we will look at potential solutions and scenarios of how democracy could cope with the current challenges. </p>
    You can download the most recent version of the syllabus <a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/ctd_syllabus.pdf">here</a>.
    <br>
	The seminar takes place weekly, on Wednesday (14:15-15:45) in seminar room SCH 100.05.  
    <br>	
	<br>
	<h3>Material</h3>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 1: Introduction</h4>
	In this session, we will get to know each other and discuss some logistics about the seminar. Moreover, a brief introduction into the topic is given.  <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/introduction.pdf">Slides</a> <br>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 2: Research Design</h4>
	The second week is about research design. We will talk about what defines "good research", why comparison is important and which methods we can employ.   <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/rd.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/good_research.png">Mindmap on good research</a><br>
	<h4>Week 2: Concepts</h4>
    This week is all about conceptualizing democracy. We will discuss different levels of abstraction in defining democracy and talk about the tension between some democratic 
    principles. <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/concepts.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/board.jpg">Brainstorming (Democracy)</a><br>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 4: Democracy - A Winning Formula?</h4>
	We will discuss Fukuyama's influential work on "The End of History" and compare it with recent developments around the globe. What's the state of democracy nowadays? 
	<br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/state_democracy.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 5: Analysing Democracies</h4>
	In this week, we will learn which data we could use to analyse the current state of democracies. Moreover, we will develop questions for our podcast project. <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/analysing_dems.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/mindmap_podcast.jpg">Brainstorming (Podcast project)</a><br>
	<br>
 	<h4>Week 6: Stretching the Rules of the Game</h4>
 	We will discuss how democracies erode gradually by taking a closer look at the book "How Democracies Die" by Stephen Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt (2017)<br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/backsliding.pdf">Slides</a><br><br>
	<h4>Week 7: The Far-Right </h4>
	This session deals with one of the most prominent contestors of liberal democracy: the far-right. <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/far_right.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/board_introduction.jpeg">Structure of introductions</a><br><br>
	<h4>Week 8: Democratic Norms and Affective Polarization </h4>
	Switching to the demand-side, we will discuss whether and why citizens accept anti-democratic behavior by their elected elites.  <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/norms_ap.pdf">Slides</a><br><br>
	<h4>Week 9: Crises </h4>
	Sometimes, there are exogeneous shocks democracies need to deal with. How do natural catastrophies affect support for democracy?  <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/crises.pdf">Slides</a><br><br>
	<h4>Week 11: Strengthening Political Participation</h4>
	Political scientists have observed an erosion of political participation of citizens in conventional forms. Could democratic innovations be an option for future democracies?<br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/solutions_citizen_assemblies_notes.pdf">Slides</a><br><br>
	<h4>Week 12: Hansaforum</h4>
	This week, the Hansaforum, a bottom-up democratic innovation project from Münster, will visit us. <br><br>
	<h4>Week 13: Performance</h4>
	In our final substantive session, we will discuss whether the performance of democracies could stop backsliding tendencies. 
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/performance.pdf">Slides</a><br><br>
	<h4>Week 14: Term paper</h4>
	In our final session, we will discuss expectations of the term paper. Moreover, we will learn how one can develop research questions and theories. 
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2526/term_paper.pdf">Slides</a><br><br>
	</body>

	{% comment %}
	<br>
	<h4>Week 5: Challenges and Facilitators of Democratization (Part 1)</h4>
	In this week, we will discuss potential causes of democratization. Moreover, we will engage with empirical articles that focus on facilitators and challenges of democratization. <br>
 	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/democratization.pdf">Slides</a><br>
 	<br>
 	<h4>Week 6: Challenges and Facilitators of Democratization (Part 2)</h4>
 	This is a continuation of last week. First, you present your podcast project before we discuss how state repression triggers backlash among citizens. <br>
 	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/democratization_part2.pdf">Slides</a><br>
 	<br>
 	<h4>Week 7: Stretching the Rules of the Game</h4>
 	We will discuss how democracies erode gradually by taking a closer look at the book "How Democracies Die" by Stephen Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt (2017)<br>
 	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/backsliding.pdf">Slides</a><br>
 	<br>
 	<h4>Week 8: Democratic Norms and Affective Polarization</h4>
 	In this week, we will look on how (if) affective polarization undermines democratic norms. <br>
 	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/norms_ap.pdf">Slides</a><br>
 	<br>
 	<h4>Week 9: Global Crises</h4>
 	Crises resulting from a pandemic, economic recessions or climate change require appropriate governance. In this session, we will discuss the tension between the climate crisis and the future of democracy. <br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/crises.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 10: Strengthening Institutions </h4>
	Institutions are key when analysing democratic backsliding. But could these be strengthened to safeguard democracy from erosion?<br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/solutions_institutions_notes.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 11: Strengthening Political Participation</h4>
	Political scientists have observed an erosion of political participation of citizens in conventional forms. Could democratic innovations be an option for future democracies?<br>
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/solutions_citizen_assemblies2.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	<br>
	<h4>Week 12: Democracy Update</h4>
	Andreas Schiel from the 'Demokratie-Update Münster' is joining us to talk about his experiences with building up a local citizen assembly. <br><br>
	<h4>Week 13: The Far-Right</h4>
	In this concluding session, we will do a session on the far-right, initially planned to be held in week 6. We'll talk about definitions, ways to explain their success, how they constitute a threat to democracy and how mainstream democrats are contributing to their success.
	<a href="{{ site.url }}assets/pdf/ctd2425/far_right.pdf">Slides</a><br>
	{% endcomment %}